Admiring the Moon Festival Lanterns in Jinping
The Tang Priest Confesses in Dark Essence Cave
Where should one strive to practice dhyana?
Swiftly to extirpate the misdeeds of the thought−horse and the mind−ape.
When they are firmly tethered they give off radiance,
But whoever halts falls to the three paths of suffering.
If one allows the divine elixir to leak away,
The jade−pure nature will wither as one slackens.
Anger, joy and worry must all be swept away:
When the wonderful mystery is gained it seems like nothing.

The story tells how the Tang Priest and his three disciples left the city of Yuhua and had a very easy journey
in what really was a land of paradise. When they had been travelling for five or six days another city
appeared.
"Where is this?" the Tang Priest asked Brother Monkey.
"It's a city," Monkey replied, "but there are no flags on the poles above the city wall and I don't know this
area, so I'll ask when we get closer." When they reached the Eastern suburb they found it noisy with bars and
tea−houses and bustling with a rice market and oil shops. Some idlers who were wandering in the streets with
nothing better to do crowded round for a better look when they saw Pig's long snout, Friar Sand's black face
and Monkey's red eyes, but they dared not come any closer to question the travelers. The Tang Priest was
sweating with the worry that they would provoke trouble as they crossed several more streets and had still not
yet reached the city wall. Then they saw a monastery gate over which were the words CLOUDS OF
COMPASSION MONASTERY.
"What about going in here to give the horse a rest and take a meal?" the Tang Priest suggested, to which
Monkey replied, "Splendid, splendid." The four of them then went inside, and this is what they saw:
Splendid, towering buildings,
Gleaming bases for statues..
The Buddha hall rise above the clouds;
The monks' cells lie in the moonlit silence.
Red mists circle the stupas;
In the shade of jade−green trees the scripture−wheel is cool.
This is a true Pure Land,
Another Naga Palace,
Where purple mists surround the Mahavira Hall.
The cloisters are never empty of people enjoying the sights,
And visitors climb the pagoda that is always open.
Incense burns in the stand at every moment,
And lamps shine on the altar through the night.
A golden bell rings rhythmically in the abbot's lodgings
As monks worship the Buddha by reciting sutras.

As the four of them looked around a monk came along the cloister and said to the Tang Priest with polite
gestures of greeting, "Where have you come from, Teacher?"
"From the Tang Court in China," the Tang Priest replied, at which the monk went down on his knees to
kowtow, only to be quickly helped up by the Tang Priest, who asked, "Why do you perform this great
courtesy, reverend abbot?"
"All the lovers of goodness here who read the sutras and recite the name of the Buddha hope to achieve
rebirth in your land of China, so that when I saw you coming in your magnificent mitre and robes I was
certain that your present splendor must be the result of your successful cultivation in earlier lives. That's why
it is right to kowtow to you."
"It alarmed me," said the Tang Priest with a smile, "it alarmed me. I am only an itinerant monk, and know no
splendor at all. To be able to live at your leisure and ease as you do, abbot, is real bliss." The monk then led
the Tang Priest to worship the Buddha statues in the main hall. It was only now that Sanzang called for his
disciples. After seeing their master start talking to the monk, Monkey and the other two had been standing in a
group with their faces averted, holding the horse's bridle and looking after the luggage, so that the monk had
not noticed them.
But when they turned round on hearing the Tang Priest's call the sight of them so frightened the monk that he
called out, "My lord, why are your distinguished disciples so hideously ugly?"
"Ugly they may be," the Tang Priest replied, "but they do have some magical powers. I have been very
grateful for their protection all the way along the journey."
As they were speaking more monks came out to greet them. The monk who had been the first to welcome the
visitors explained to the others, "This teacher has come from Great Tang in China, and these three gentlemen
are his distinguished disciples."
"Teacher," said the others with mixed pleasure and apprehension, "why have you come here from Great
China?"
"I have been commanded by the Tang emperor to worship the Buddha and seek the scriptures in the Western
Heaven," Sanzang replied. "As I was passing this way I have come to your monastery to ask where we are and
take a vegetarian meal before setting out again." The monks were all delighted, and they invited the visitors
into the abbot's lodgings, where there were some more monks who were performing ceremonies on behalf of
benefactors.
The monk who had met them first went on to explain to the others, "Come and have a look at what people
from China are like: some are handsome and some are ugly. The beauty of the handsome ones could never be
caught in a painting or drawing, and the ugly ones look really weird." Both the monks and the benefactors all
came to greet them, after which everyone sat down.
When tea had been drunk the Tang Priest inquired, "What is this fine country called?"
"This is Jinping, one of the outer prefectures of India," the monks replied.
"How far is it from this prefecture to Vulture Peak?" the Tang Priest asked. "It is about seven hundred miles
from here to the capital," the monks replied, "and we have walked that distance. As we haven't gone further

West to Vulture Peak we don't know how far that is and would not like to make a wild guess." The Tang
Priest thanked them.
A little later a vegetarian meal was provided, after which the Tang Priest wanted to be on his way, only to be
pressed to stay by the monks and the benefactors who said, "Teacher, you must stay for a couple of days or so.
Enjoy the Full Moon Festival before you go on your way."
"On my journey I have only been aware of mountains and rivers and the danger of running into ogres or
monsters," the Tang Priest replied, "and I have lost my sense of time. I don't know when Full Moon is."
"It's because your heart is so set on worshipping the Buddha and on enlightenment that you have not thought
about it, Teacher," the monks replied. "Today is the thirteenth of the first month and the lanterns will be tried
out tonight. The day after tomorrow is the fifteenth, when the festival begins, and it goes on till the lanterns
are put away on the eighteenth or nineteenth. We enjoy celebrations here and our prefect, who cares for the
people, has lanterns set out everywhere and music played all night. We also have a Bridge of Golden
Lamps−−it's an ancient tradition that still flourishes. If you will stay for a few days, my lords, our monastery
can certainly afford to entertain you." The Tang Priest had no choice but to stay. As the bell and drum in the
Buddha hall resounded to the skies the faithful came in from the streets bringing lanterns to present to the
Buddha. The Tang Priest and the rest of them came out of the abbot's lodgings to look at the lanterns, after
which everyone turned in.
The next day, when they had eaten the vegetarian breakfast the monks of the monastery brought them, they
strolled in the garden at the back. It really was a lovely place:
It is the first month of the year,
The beginning of the spring.
The wooded garden is quiet and elegant;
The beauty of the scene subdued.
Throughout the four seasons flowers and trees contend;
Turquoise peaks rise behind each other.
Fragrant flowers are growing before the steps,
And scent comes from the plum−tree's branches.
Where there is red it joins the tender peach blossom;
Where there is green it mingles with the willows' fresh green.
Forget about the splendor of the Gold Valley Garden;
Say nothing of the Wang River landscapes painted by Wang Wei.
In the flowing stream

The wild ducks bob and rise;
Among bamboos by the thousand
Poets ponder their choice of words.
Tree and herbaceous peonies, myrtle, fleeting−smile flowers,
That waken when their time is due;
Camellias, red plum blossom, winter jasmine and daphne,
All early to open out their beauty.
The snow piled by the hidden cliff seems frozen solid still;
The clouds that drift by the distant trees already bring early traces of spring.
The deer sees its reflection beside the pool;
Cranes come to hear the lute beneath the pines.
A few halls and pavilions to East and West,
Where travelers may stay;
Buildings and pagodas to North and South
Where monks may meditate in peace.
Among the flowers
Are one or two houses to nourish one's nature,
Where double eaves rise above each other.
Amid the hills and streams
Are three or four cells in which to reline magic, Peaceful and light.
This is indeed a natural spot for a recluse:
Why look elsewhere for the earthly paradise?
After a day enjoying the garden they inspected the lanterns in the Buddha hall before going to look at the
lantern festival. This is what they saw:

A splendid city of agate,
A fairyland of glass;
Palaces of crystal and mica,
Like layer upon layer of brocade,
Openwork carving behind openwork carving.
The dazzling bridge of stars moved heaven and earth
While trees of fire made waves of red
Flutes and drums played in the streets.
A moon like a ring of jade hung over a thousand gates;
Fragrant breezes blew through ten thousand homes.
There were giant turtle peaks soaring on high,
Fishes and dragons emerging from the sea,
Phoenixes sporting in the sky.
As all admired the moon and the lanterns
The atmosphere was full of harmony.
Among the crowds dressed in fine silks
All enjoyed the songs and panpipes.
Carriages rumbled along.
There was no end of beautiful faces,
Dashing gallants, And marvellous sights.
When Sanzang and the others had looked at the lanterns in the monastery they wandered around the streets of
the Eastern suburb, not going back to bed till the second watch in the middle of the night.
The next day Sanzang said to the monks, "I made a vow to sweep pagodas, and on the occasion of tonight's
Moon Festival I would like to ask the reverend abbot to open the doors of the pagoda to allow me to fulfil this
vow." The monks opened the doors, and when Friar Sand fetched his cassock and brought it to him on the
ground floor he put it over his shoulders and prayed to the Buddha. Then he swept the ground floor with a
broom, took the cassock off and gave it back to Friar Sand. He swept the second story next, and so on story by
story till he reached the top. In every story there was a Buddha, and in each one he opened all the windows,

swept the floor, and enjoyed the splendid views. By the time he had finished sweeping and come down again
it was late and all the lamps had been lit.
It was now the night of the full moon. "Venerable teacher," the monks said, "last night you only saw the lamps
in our humble monastery and the outskirts of the city. As tonight is the main festival why don't we go into the
city to see the golden lamps there?" The Tang Priest was glad to follow this suggestion, and he went with his
three disciples and the monks of the monastery into the city to see the lanterns. Indeed:
On the festive fifteenth night
The harmony of spring begins with the first full moon.
Decorated lanterns hang in the busy markets
As all sing the songs of a world at peace.
Over the lantern light in streets and markets
The moon's round mirror rises in the sky
Like a silver dish, driven by the charioteer Ping Yi.
The lanterns were like a brocade carpet woven by fairies;
The lanterns were reflected by the moon,
Doubling its brilliance;
The moon shone on the lanterns,
Making them resplendent.
There was no end of iron−chain star bridges,
Lantern flowers and trees of fire.
Snowflake lanterns,
Plum−blossom lanterns,
Like fragments of ice in spring;
Embroidered screen lanterns,
Painted screen lanterns,
Made up from every color.
Walnut lanterns,

Lotus lanterns,
Hung high on lantern towers;
Blue lion lanterns,
White elephant lanterns,
Fixed on lofty frames.
Shrimp lanterns,
Terrapin lanterns,
Placed in front of awnings;
Goat lanterns,
Hare lanterns,
Bringing the eaves to life.
Eagle lanterns,
Phoenix lanterns,
Lined up next to each other;
Tiger lanterns,
Horse lanterns,
Being carried along together.
Red−crowned crane lanterns,
White deer lanterns,
Carrying the Star of Longevity;
Goldfish lanterns,
Whale lanterns,
On which rode the poet Li Bai.
Giant turtle mountain lanterns,
Where gods and immortals gathered;
Revolving horse lanterns

On which warriors joined combat.
The towers of lanterns on thousands of houses
Made a world of clouds and smoke for several miles.
On one side, shining reins and flying jade saddles;
On the other, rumbling carriages leave fragrance behind.
On the red balcony,
Leaning against the railings,
Behind the curtains,
Shoulder to shoulder,
Hand in hand,
Pairs of beauties were eager for the fun.
By the bridge over green waters,
Noisy,
Many−coloured,
Drunken,
Laughing
Couples enjoyed the brilliant sights.
All of the city's flutes and drums were playing;
Panpipes and songs went on all night.
There is also this poem as evidence:
Amid the fine brocades, of lotus were the songs;
This blessed land at peace was full of many throngs.
The lanterns and the moon upon this festive night
Foretold rich harvests after rain and wind just right.

This was a night when the curfew was relaxed, so that there were huge crowds and a great commotion. People
were dancing, walking on stilts, wearing masks and riding elephants, pushing and crowding to East and to
West as they looked all around. When they reached the bridge of golden lamps the Tang Priest and the monks
pushed forward for a look and saw that it consisted of three golden lamps each the size of a water vat and
shaped like a two−storied pavilion with a light shining out through intricate gold and silver filigree openwork.
Glazed ceramic tiles inside the lamps reflected their light. They were so bright they outshone the moon, and
their oil was very fragrant.
"What sort of oil do those lamps burn?" the Tang Priest asked the monks, "and why does it smell so
remarkably good?"
"You wouldn't know that, Teacher," the monks replied. "There is a county near this prefecture called Mintian.
In the whole county there are 240 wards, and when we have our annual assignment of jobs to be done for the
state, 240 households have to provide oil. All the other jobs assigned by the prefecture or county are
reasonable enough, but these oil households have a very hard time. Every household has to take it on for a
year, and it costs them over two hundred ounces of silver. The oil isn't ordinary oil but perfumed refined
butter oil. One ounce costs two ounces of silver and a pound costs thirty−two ounces. Each of the lamps holds
five hundred pounds of oil, making 1,500 pounds for the three of them, costing 48,000 ounces of silver. With
other miscellaneous expenses it comes to over 50,000 ounces. And that only lasts three nights."
"How can so much oil be used up in only three nights?" Monkey asked.
"In each lamp there are forty−nine big wicks about the size of an egg made of rushes wrapped in silk floss,"
the monks explained. "When they have burned for one night the Lord Buddhas appear, the oil all vanishes and
the lamp goes out."
"I suppose the Lord Buddhas take all the oil," said Pig with a grin as he stood at one side.
"That's right," the monks replied, "that's what everyone in the city has always said ever since ancient times. If
the oil runs dry they say that the Buddhas have taken the oil and the crops will certainly be bountiful; but if it
doesn't dry up on one occasion there will be famine, drought and the wrong weather at the wrong time in that
year. That's why everyone makes this offering."
As they were talking there was the howling of a wind up in the air, sending everyone who was admiring the
lanterns fleeing in terror. The monks could not hold their ground either. "Let's go back, venerable teacher,"
they said, "the wind's here. It's the Lord Buddhas bringing blessings. They're here to see the lanterns."
"How can you tell that?" the Tang Priest asked.
"It's the same every year," the monks replied. "The wind blows up before the third watch. Everybody gets out
of the way as they know that it is the Lord Buddhas bringing down blessings."
"I am one who thinks of, invokes and worships Buddhas," the Tang Priest said. "If the Buddhas are honoring
us with their presence on this festive occasion it would be wonderful to be able to worship them." He rejected
the monks' repeated urgings to go back, and a little later the forms of three Buddhas appeared in the wind and
approached the lamps. The Tang Priest was so excited that he ran to the top of the lamp bridge and threw
himself down worship.

Brother Monkey rushed forward in alarm to drag him to his feet and say, "They're no good, Master. I'm sure
they're evil." Before the words were even out of his mouth the lamps all went out as with a great whoosh the
Tang Priest was swept up by the wind. It was terrible! Who knew what evil monsters from what cave in what
mountain had been posing as Buddhas to watch the golden lamps?
Pig and Friar Sand were thrown into such panic that they rushed all about, searching and calling for their
master. "Brothers," called Monkey, "no use shouting here. The master's bliss has turned to disaster. He's been
carried off by evil spirits."
"How can you tell that, my lord," the appalled monks asked.
"You're just a bunch of mortals," Monkey replied with a grin, "so you haven't realized what's been happening
all these years. The evil spirits have fooled you into thinking they're true Buddhas coming down to accept the
offerings of lamps. The Buddhas that appeared when the wind blew just now were three evil spirits. My
master didn't realize who they were, so he went up on the top of the bridge to worship them. They covered up
all the lights and carried him off together with the oil in the lamps. As I was a bit too late the three of them got
away by wind."
"Brother," said Friar Sand, "Whatever are we to do?"
"Not a moment to lose," said Monkey. "You two go back the monastery with the monks and look after the
horse and the luggage. I'm going after them while this wind's still blowing."
The splendid Great Sage then shot up by his somersault cloud into mid air, picked up the stench of the wind
and headed Northeast in pursuit, carrying on till all of a sudden the wind dropped at dawn. A great mountain
could be seen, a most steep, towering and splendid mountain:
Many a foothill and ravine,
Twisting and bending streams.
Creepers hang from the beetling precipice,
Pine and cypress rise from the lonely rock.
Cranes cry in the morning mists,
Wild geese call among the clouds at dawn.
Jutting peaks like a row of halberds,
Jagged crags of interlocking rocks.
The summits rise to eighty thousand feet,
And sheer−walled ridges make a thousand angles.
Wild flowers and noble trees all flourish with the spring;

Cuckoo and oriole respond to the scenery with song.
Majestic beauty,
Towering grandeur,
Steep, grotesque crags hard to climb.
One will stay there long in silence:
All that can be heard are tigers and leopards breathing.
River deer and white deer wander around;
Jade−coloured hares and gray wolves come and go.
The stream in the deep ravine will flow for a million miles;
Twisting torrents splash loud against the rocks.
While the Great Sage was on the top of a scar looking for his way he saw four people coming from the
Western slopes driving three goats and all shouting, "New Year." Monkey's fiery eyes with their golden pupils
flashed as he took a closer look to see that they were the four Duty Gods of the year, the month, the day and
the hour in disguise.
The Great Sage then pulled out his iron cudgel, shook it till it was as thick as a ricebowl and about twelve feet
long and sprang down from the cliff with a shout of, "Where are you skulking off to like that, trying to hide
your faces?"
When the four Duty Gods realized that he had rumbled them they at once turned back into their normal selves,
kowtowed beside the path and said, "Forgive us, Great Sage, forgive us."
"Just because I haven't had any jobs for you recently you thought I was getting lax and so you've all become
very casual," Monkey said. "You didn't even greet me. It's outrageous! Why aren't you giving my master your
secret protection? Where are you going?"
"Because your master somewhat forgot his dhyana nature and was so eager to enjoy himself in the Clouds of
Compassion Monastery in Jinping Prefecture," the Duty Gods said, "he met with evil at the height of splendor,
his joy turned to disaster, and he was captured by the evil spirits. The Defenders of the Faith are looking after
him at the moment. We realized that you would be coming after him this very night, Great Sage, and we came
here to report to you in case you did not know the mountains and forests here."
"If you were here to report," said Brother Monkey, "why did you disguise your identities, why were you
driving three goats, and what were you shouting and yelling for?"
"The three goats were for luck at the beginning of the year.
They are to drive away the evil that's obstructing your master."

Monkey had been absolutely determined to beat them, but on hearing this explanation he let them off and put
his cudgel away as his fury turned to delight. "Are there evil spirits on this mountain?" he asked. "Yes," they
replied, "yes. This mountain is called Green Dragon Mountain and there's a cave in it called the Dark Essence
Cave where three evil spirits live. The oldest is called King Cold−avoider, the second is called King
Heat−avoider and the third is called King Dust−avoider. They've lived here for a thousand years and have
been fond of refined butter oil since they were children. Ever since they became spirits some years ago they've
been pretending to be Buddhas to trick the officials and people of Jinping into setting out those golden lamps
full of the refined butter oil that they take in their Buddha guises in the middle of every first month. When
they saw your master this time they realized that he was a holy monk and carried him off to the cave too. Any
day now they'll slice off his flesh to fry in the refined butter. You must use your skills to save him as soon as
possible."
On hearing this Monkey dismissed the four Duty Gods with a shout and went round the mountain looking for
the cave. Within a mile or two he saw a rock face by a gill, at the foot of which was a stone building with a
pair of stone doors that stood ajar. Beside the doors was a stone tablet on which was inscribed
GREEN DRAGON MOUNTAIN
DARK ESSENCE CAVE
Not daring to go in uninvited, Monkey stopped and called, "Give me my master back at once, monster." With
a great noise the doors burst wide open, and out rushed a crowd of bull−headed demons who glared as they
asked, "Who are you, yelling here like that?"
"I'm the senior disciple of the holy monk Tang Sanzang who's come from Great Tang in the East to fetch
scriptures," Monkey replied. "He was looking at the lanterns in Jinping along our way when your chief
demons carried him off here. Give him back at once if you want me to spare your lives. If you don't I'll turn
our den upside−down and turn all you demons into just pus and blood."
As soon as the junior demons heard this they rushed inside to report, "Disaster, Your Majesties, disaster!" The
three old evil spirits had taken Sanzang into the depths of the cave and with no further ado were telling their
underlings to strip him and wash him with water from the torrent. They were just about to have him sliced and
diced into tiny pieces to fry in the refined butter when they heard the report of disaster from outside. The
oldest demon king asked with some alarm what had happened.
"There's a hairy−faced monk who looks like a thunder god outside," the junior devils replied. "He's shouting
that Your Majesties carried his master here and wants him given back straight away if our lives are to be
spared. Otherwise he'll turn our den upside−down and turn us all into pus and blood."
This news shocked the demon kings, who all said, "We've only just caught the wretch, and haven't even asked
him his name and his background. Little ones, dress him again and bring him here to be questioned. We must
find out who he is and where he's from."
A crowd of devils untied the Tang Priest, put his clothes back on and pushed him to before the thrones, where
he fell to his knees, trembling with fear, and pleaded, "Spare my life, Your Majesties, spare my life."

"Where are you from, monk?" the three evil spirits said, all talking at once, "and why did you rush into the
way of our clouds instead of avoiding the Buddha images?"
"I have been sent by the Great Tang Emperor in the East to worship the Lord Buddha and fetch the scriptures
from the Great Thunder Monastery in India," Sanzang replied with kowtows. "When I went into the Clouds of
Compassion Monastery for a vegetarian meal the monks there pressed me to stay to see the lanterns at the
Moon Festival. Seeing Your Majesties appearing as Buddhas from the bridge of golden lamps I kowtowed to
you because my mortal eyes took you for real Buddhas. That's why I got in the way of your clouds, Your
Majesties."
"How long was the journey from your country in the East to here?" the evil spirits asked. "How many people
have you got with you? What are they called? Tell us the truth straight away and we'll spare your life."
"My secular name was Chen Xuanzang," the Tang Priest replied, "and I was a monk in the Jinshan Monastery
from boyhood. Later I was given official rank as a monk in the Hongfu Monastery in Chang'an. When the
minister Wei Zheng beheaded the Dragon King of the River Jing in his dream and the Tang emperor came
back to life after his travels in the underworld, a Great Land and Water Mass was held for the rebirth of souls.
The Tang emperor chose me to officiate at this ceremony and expound the great principles. The Bodhisattva
Guanyin appeared during the mass and informed me that in the Thunder Monastery in the Western Heaven
there are three stores of true scriptures that can carry the dead up to Heaven. I was sent to fetch them and
given the title Sanzang, or "Three Stores." As I use Tang as my surname people call me Tang Sanzang. I have
three disciples. The first one is called Sun Wukong the Novice, and he is the Great Sage Equaling Heaven
who has been converted to the truth."
This news came as a shock to the evil spirits, who asked, "Did this Great Sage Equaling Heaven make great
havoc in Heaven five hundred years ago?"
"Yes, yes," the Tang Priest said. "The second one is called Zhu Wuneng or Zhu Bajie. He is Marshal Tian
Peng come down to earth. The third is Sha Wujing, or Friar Sand, the Curtain−lifting General in mortal
reincarnation."
"It's as well we haven't eaten him yet," the evil spirits all exclaimed in horror. "Little ones, lock the Tang
Priest in iron chains at the back. When we've caught his three disciples we'll eat them together." They then
mustered a force of armed yak, water−buffalo and ox spirits to go outside carrying bugles, waving banners
and beating drums.
Once the three evil spirits were fully clad in their armor they went out and shouted, "Who's that who dares
come here shouting like that?" Monkey slipped round behind the scar to have a good look, and this is what the
evil spirits were like:
Multi−coloured faces, round eyes,
Towering horns.
Four sharp−pointed ears,
Neat and shining bright.
Bodies patterned like a painting,

Covered with brocades that shine like fireflies.
The first one wore a hat of foxes' fur
And hot steam rose from the long hairs of his face.
The second wore a flaming cloak of lightest gauze
And had four gleaming, jade−like hooves.
The third had a mighty roar like thunder;
His sharp and pointed fangs were just like silver needles.
Each was brave and fierce
As they carried their three weapons;
One used a battle−axe,
One was an expert in the cutlass,
And the third had a knotted flail resting on his shoulders.
The other evil spirits, tall and short, fat and thin, senior and junior, were all cattle−headed monsters carrying
spears or clubs. There were three big banners clearly inscribed with the words "King Cold−avoider," "King
Heat−avoider" and "King Dust−avoider." After looking at all this for a while Monkey lost his patience and
went up to them with a shout of, "Can you recognize Monkey, thieving damned ogres?"
"Are you the Sun Wukong who made havoc in Heaven?" the evil spirits shouted back. "It really is a case of
I heard your name before I saw your face:
The sight of that would bring the gods disgrace.
So all you are is a macaque."
"I'll get you, you lamp−oil thieves," Monkey retorted in high dudgeon. "Don't talk such rubbish, you
smooth−tongued monsters. Give my master back at once." With that he advanced and swung his iron cudgel,
to be parried by the old demons who raised their weapons to meet the blow. A splendid fight ensued in the
mountain hollow:
Battle−axe, cutlass and flail

Met by the Monkey King's lone cudgel.
Cold−avoider, Heat−avoider and Dust−avoider
Had heard of the Great Sage Equaling Heaven.
When the cudgel rose it scared demons and gods;
Axe and cutlass hacked and flew.
A primal dharma image of true emptiness
Holding off three demons masquerading as Buddhas.
Their noses all greasy with this year's stolen oil,
They tried to snatch the monk sent by the emperor.
One for his master's sake feared not the lengthy road;
The others in their greed had lamps offered every year.
All that could be beard was clash of axe and cutlass
And the noisy clatter of the cudgel.
With clashes and lunges three fought against one
As each showed his skill with blocks and parries.
They fought from dawn till almost nightfall
And a victor had yet to emerge in the struggle.
By the time Monkey's cudgel had gone 150 rounds with the three demons it was nearly evening and the
outcome was still in doubt. Then Dust−avoider sprang forward from the ranks with a swing of his flail and
waved a flag, whereupon the crowd of cattle−headed demons swarmed round Monkey, encircling him and
swinging wildly at him with their weapons. Seeing that things were going badly, Monkey set off his
somersault cloud and fled in a whoosh. The demons did not go after him but called their devils back so that
everyone could have an evening meal. They told the junior devils to take a bowl of food to Sanzang as well:
he was not to be dealt with until Monkey had been caught. As the master was a lifelong vegetarian and was
besides feeling miserable he sobbed and let none of the food touch his lips.
The story tells how Monkey rode his cloud back to the Clouds of Compassion Monastery and called,
"Brothers."

On hearing this Pig and Friar Sand, who were waiting for him and discussing what to do, came out together to
greet him with the words, "Brother, why are you only back now after being away all day? What's happened to
the master?"
"I followed the smell of the wind right through the night till we got to a mountain and it disappeared,"
Monkey replied with a smile. "Luckily the four Duty Gods told me that the mountain's called Green Dragon
Mountain and that there's a Dark Essence Cave on it where three evil spirits live: King Cold−avoider, King
Heat−avoider and King Dust−avoider. They've been stealing the oil here for years on end by disguising
themselves as Buddhas to trick the officials of Jinping Prefecture. When they came across us this year they
wickedly carried our master off with them. I told the Duty Gods and the rest of them to give the master some
secret protection while I shouted insults at them from outside their doors. When the three demons came out
they all looked like bullheaded demons. The first of them fought with a battle−axe, the second with a cutlass
and the third with a flail. They had a whole gang of cattle−headed monsters with them, waving banners and
beating drums. The fight went on all day and was still in the balance when one of the demon kings waved a
flag to bring all the junior devils forward. As it was late and I was worried that I couldn't beat them I came
back by somersault cloud."
"I reckon it must be the Demon King of Fengdu who's making trouble for you," said Pig.
"What makes you guess that?" Friar Sand asked. "I can tell because our big brother said they were all
cattle−headed monsters," replied Pig with a laugh.
"No, no," said Monkey. "I saw them and they were all rhinoceros spirits."
"If they're rhinos we've just got to catch them and saw their horns off," said Pig. "They'll be worth quite a bit
of silver."
As they were talking the monks all asked Monkey if he had eaten any supper. "I'll have something if it's no
trouble," Brother Monkey replied, "but I can do without just as well."
"Surely you're hungry after fighting all day, my lord," the monks said.
"You can't get hungry in a mere day," Monkey laughed. "I once went without food for five hundred years."
The monks did not know whether he was telling the truth or joking, and a little later food was brought in that
Monkey ate, after which he said, "Tidy up and go to sleep. We'll go and fight them again tomorrow and
capture the demon kings so as to rescue the master."
"What nonsense, brother," said Friar Sand, who was standing to one side. "As the saying goes, 'Delay brings
wisdom.' It'll be terrible if that monster stays awake tonight and murders the master. We'd better go there right
now and make such a row that he can't do anything. It may go badly wrong if we lose a single moment."
When Pig heard this he braced himself and said, "Friar Sand's right. Let's go and put down those demons. The
moon's bright enough." Accepting their advice, Monkey left his instructions with the monks of the monastery.
"Look after the luggage and the horse. When we've captured the evil spirits we'll bring them back here to
prove to the prefect that they're imposters. Then he can end the oil levy and relieve the common people of this
hardship. That'll be a good thing, won't it?" The monks all accepted their orders while the three of them left
the city by auspicious cloud. Indeed:

Idleness and unrestraint
Threw the dhyana into confusion;
Danger and catastrophe
Led the Way−heart into delusion.
If you don't know who was to win this encounter listen to the explanation in the next installment.

