Our Buddha Creates the Scriptures and Passes on Perfect Bliss
Guanyin Obeys a Decree and Goes to Chang'an
If you try to ask about the dhyana

Or investigate the innumerable
You will waste your life and achieve nothing.
Polishing bricks to make mirrors,
Or piling up snow to turn it into grain−−
However many years have you wasted like that?
A hair can contain an ocean,
A mustard−seed can hold a mountain,
And the golden Kasyapa only smiles.
When you are awakened you will surpass the Ten Stages and the Three Vehicles,
And stop the four kinds of birth and the six types of reincarnation.
Who has ever heard, before the cliff of thoughts extinguished,
Under the tree that has no shadow,
The sound of the cuckoo in a spring dawn?
The path by the Cao Stream is dangerous,
The Vulture Peak is high in the clouds:
Here the voice of the ancients was a mystery.
On a cliff ten thousand feet high
Five−leaved lotuses bloom
As scent coils round the shutters of the old palace.
At that time
Your knowledge smashes all the currents of thought;
The Dragon King and the Three Treasures can be seen.
This lyric poem is set to the tune Su Wu Man. Our story goes on to how our Buddha, the Tathagata, left the
Jade Emperor and went back to the Thunder Monastery, where he saw the three thousand Buddhas, five
hundred Arhats, eight great Vajrapanis and countless Bodhisattvas standing under the pairs of sala trees at the
foot of the Vulture Peak, all holding banners, canopies, jewels and magical flowers. The Tathagata brought his
propitious cloud to a halt and addressed them thus:

"With my deep insight
I surveyed the Three Worlds.
The origin of nature
Is ultimately emptiness,
Like the great void,
Containing nothing at all.
The subjection of this evil monkey
Was a mystery beyond understanding.
It is called the beginning of life and death:
Such is the appearance of things.
When he had spoken a sacred light filled the sky with forty−two rainbows that linked North and South
together. All who saw them bowed, and a moment later the Buddha gathered together some felicitous cloud
and climbed to the supreme Lotus Throne, where he seated himself in majesty.
Then the three thousand Buddhas, the five hundred Arhats, the eight Vajrapanis and the four Bodhisattvas
came forward to bow to him with their hands together and ask, "Who was it who wrecked the Heavenly
Palace and ruined the Peach Banquet?"
"The wretch was a monkey fiend born on the Mountain of Flowers and Fruit," the Buddha replied, "whose
towering crimes would beggar description. None of the heavenly generals were able to subdue him, and when
Lord Lao Zi refined him with fire after Erlang had captured him, he was unharmed. When I went there he was
in the middle of the thunder generals, giving a great display of his martial prowess and his spirit. I stopped the
fighting and asked him what it was all about. He said that he had divine powers, was able to do
transformations, and could ride a somersault cloud for thirty−six thousand miles at a single jump. I made a
wager with him that he could not jump out of my hand, then grabbed him, turned my fingers into the Five
Elements Mountain, and sealed him under it. The Jade Emperor opened wide the golden gates of the Jade
Palace, and invited me to be the guest of honour at a Banquet to Celebrate Peace in Heaven he gave to thank
me. After that I took my leave of him and came back here." They were all delighted by the news and they
congratulated him effusively, after which they withdrew group by group, each to go about his duties as all
rejoiced in the divine truth. Indeed:
Propitious vapours filled Paradise,

Rainbows surround the Venerable One.
The Western Paradise, known as the best,
Is ruled by the dharma King of non−phenomenon.
Black apes are always offering fruit,
Deer hold flowers in their mouths;
Blue phoenixes dance,
Coloured birds call;
Sacred turtles offer long life,
Immortal cranes present magic mushrooms.
Here they peacefully enjoy the Pure Land of the Jetavana Park,
The infinite realms of the Dragon Palace.
Every day flowers bloom,
Fruit is always ripe.
Through practicing silence they return to the truth,
Achieving reality by contemplation.
There is no birth nor death;
They neither wax nor wane.
Mists follow them as they come and go;
Untouched by heat or cold, they do not notice the years.
One day, as the Buddha dwelt in the Thunder Monastery on the Vulture Peak, he called together all the other
Buddhas, Arhats, guardian deities, Bodhisattvas, Vajrapanis, monks and nuns and said, "As we are beyond
time, I don't know how long it has been since the crafty ape was subdued and Heaven pacified, but by earthly
reckoning it must be about five hundred years. As today is a fine early autumn day and I have a precious bowl
filled with a hundred kinds of rare flowers and a thousand varieties of exotic fruit, what would you say to our
having an Ullambana Feast?" They all put their hands together and performed the reverence of going round
him three times in acceptance. The Buddha then ordered Ananda to hold the bowl of flowers and fruit while
Kasyapa laid them out. The hosts were moved to gratitude, which they expressed in verse.
The poem on happiness went:

The Star of Happiness shines bright before the Venerable One;
Gifts of happiness spread wide and deep, ever richer.
Fortune is boundless and lasts as long as the Earth;
A happy fate has the luck to be linked with Heaven.
Fields of happiness are widely sown and flourish every year;
The sea of happiness is mighty and deep, never changing.
Happiness fills Heaven and Earth, leaving legacies of happiness
Happiness grows beyond measure, eternally complete.
The poem on official rank went:
With rank as high as a mountain, coloured phoenixes call;
With rank ever increasing, we praise the evening star.
Salary raised to ten thousand bushels, and a healthy body;
Salary raised to a thousand tons, and the world at peace.
Rank and salary equaling Heaven, and eternal too;
Rank and fame as great as the sea, and even clearer.
Rank and favour continuing for ever, greatly to be admired;
Rank and nobility without bounds, like ten thousand kingdoms.
The poem on longevity went:
The Star of Longevity shines towards the Buddha;
The glories of the land of longevity start from here.
Fruits of longevity fill the bowls, glowing with good omen;

Longevity's flowers are newly plucked and placed on the lotus throne.
Poems of longevity, pure and elegant, full of rare conceits,
Songs of longevity sung with exquisite talent.
Life as long as sun and moon,
Life that will outlast both mountains and seas.
When the Bodhisattvas had presented all the poems they asked the Buddha to expound the fundamentals to
them. Then the Tathagata opened his excellent mouth and expounded the great Law and retribution. He spoke
about the wonderful scriptures of the Three Vehicles and the theory of the Five Aggregates as contained in the
Surangama−sutra; the deities and nagas gathered round, and flowers came raining down in profusion. Indeed:
The meditating heart shines like the moon in a thousand rivers;
The true nature embraces ten thousand miles of sky.
When the Buddha had finished his sermon he said to the host, "I have observed that the morality of the living
creatures of the four continents varies. In the Eastern Continent of Superior Body they worship Heaven and
Earth, their minds are livery and they are even−tempered. In the Northern Kuru Continent they are given to
killing living things, but they only do it to feed themselves; they are stupid and lazy by nature, but they do not
trample much on others. Our Western Continent of Cattle−gift has people who neither covet nor kill. They
nourish the vital essence and submerge the spirit; and although they produce no saints of the highest order,
they all live to a ripe old age. But in the Southern Jambu Continent they are greedy and lecherous and delight
in the sufferings of others; they go in for a great deal of killing and quarrelling. That continent can with truth
be called a vicious field of tongues and mouths, an evil sea of disputation. I now have Three Stores of True
Scriptures with which they can be persuaded to be good."
On hearing this, all the Bodhisattvas put their hands together in submission, then went forward to ask, "What
Three Stores of True Scriptures does the Tathagata have?"
"I have one store of the Vinaya, the law, which is about Heaven; one of Sastras, expositions which are
concerned with Earth; and one of Sutras, or scriptures, which save ghosts. The Three Stores consist of fifteen
thousand one hundred and forty−four scrolls in thirty−five classes. They are the scriptures for cultivating the
truth, and the gate to real goodness. I want to send them to the Eastern lands because it is intolerable that the
beings of that quarter should all be such stupid wretches who slander and defame the true word, do not
understand the gist of my Law, and have lapsed from the orthodox Yogacara Sect. How am I to find one with
the magic powers to go to the East, choose a worthy believer and bid him make the arduous crossing of a
thousand mountain and ten thousand rivers in search of the scriptures until he finally comes to this abode of
mine to receive them? When he does come they will be sent to the East for ever to convert all living beings,
which will be a blessing as big as a mountain, a cause for congratulation as deep as the sea. Is anyone willing
to go and find him?"

The Bodhisattva Guanyin went up to the lotus throne, and after going round the Buddha three times by way of
salutation she said, "Your untalented disciple wishes to go to the East to find a man to come and fetch the
scriptures." All present raised their heads to look at the Bodhisattva:
Her understanding filling out the four virtues,
Wisdom filling her golden body.
From her necklace hang pearls and jade,
Her bracelet is made of jewels.
Her hair is black clouds skillfully piled like coiling dragons;
Her embroidered girdle lightly sways, a phoenix wing.
Seagreen jade buttons,
A gown of white silk gauze,
Bathed with sacred light;
Brocade skirts,
A girdle of gold,
Shielded by propitious vapours.
Eyebrows like crescent moons,
Eyes like a pair of stars.
A jade face full of heavenly happiness,
Scarlet lips making a touch of red.
Her pure bottle of sweet dew is ever full,
The willow twigs in it are always green.
She delivers from the eight disasters,
Saves all living beings,
Great is her compassion.
She stays on Mount Tai,
Lives in the Southern Sea,

Rescues the suffering when she bears their cries,
Never failing to answer every call,
Infinitely divine and miraculous.
Her orchid heart admires the purple bamboo;
Her orchid nature loves the fragrant creeper.
She is the merciful ruler of Potaraka Island,
The living Guanyin of the Tide Cave.
The Buddha was very pleased to see her.
"No one but the venerable Guanyin, whose divine powers are so great, will do for this mission," he said.
"What instructions have you for your disciple as she goes to the East?" Guanyin asked.
"You must watch the route all the way," said the Buddha. "You may not go via the Milky Way, but if
necessary you may have a little cloud or mist. As you cross mountains and rivers you must note the distances
carefully to enable you to give full instructions to the man who will come to fetch the scriptures. But that true
believer will, I'm afraid, have a difficult journey, so I shall give you five treasures for him." The Buddha
ordered Ananda and Kasyapa to bring out a brocade cassock and a nine−ringed monk's staff.
"Give this cassock and staff to him who will come to fetch the scriptures: they are for him to use. If he is
determined to come here, he can avoid the Wheel of Reincarnation by wearing this cassock, and he will be
free from evil if he carries this staff." The Bodhisattva bowed and took them. The Buddha then produced three
bands.
"These precious things are called 'tight bands,'" he told the Bodhisattva as he handed them to her. "Although
all three of them look the same, they have different uses. I also have three Band−Tightening Spells. If you
meet any devils with great magic powers on your journey you should persuade them to reform and become the
disciples of the pilgrim who will come to fetch the scriptures. If they do not do is they are told these bands
should be put on their heads, where they will of themselves take root in the flesh. If the appropriate spell for
each one is recited the victim's eyes will bulge, his head will ache, and his forehead will split open. He will
thus be certainly induced to adopt our religion."
When he finished speaking the Bodhisattva bowed eagerly and withdrew. She told Huian the Novice to
accompany her, and he took his iron staff weighing a thousand pounds with him so that he could as a
demon−quelling strongman for the Bodhisattva. The Bodhisattva wrapped the cassock up in a bundle and
gave it to him to carry. She then put the golden bands away safely and went down the Vulture Peak with the
staff in her hand. This journey was to have consequences:
The Buddha's disciple comes back to his original vow;

The Venerable Golden Cicada is dressed in sandalwood.
When the Bodhisattva reached the foot of the mountain the Gold−headed Immortal of the Jade Truth Temple
stopped her at the temple gate and invited her to take some tea. But she dared not stop for long, and so she
said, "I have been given a sacred command by the Tathagata to go to the East and find a man who will come
to fetch the scriptures."
"When will he arrive?" the Immortal asked.
"It is not definite," the Bodhisattva replied, "but he will probably reach here in two or three years' time." She
took her leave of the Immortal and as she traveled amid cloud and mist she estimated the distances. There are
some verses to prove it:
She cared nothing of the journey of ten thousand miles to find him,
But worried about finding the right man.
Looking for the man seemed to be very chancy,
But how can it be a mere coincidence?
One who teaches the Way for the wrong motives will distort it;
He who explains it without faith will preach in vain.
Whoever will try and know it with his whole being,
Is bound to have a future ahead of him.
As the teacher and her disciple were on their journey they suddenly noticed a thousand miles of weak water,
which was the River of Flowing Sands.
"Disciple," said the Bodhisattva, "this will be hard to cross for the man who will come to fetch the scriptures,
as he will be of impure bone and mortal flesh. How will he do it?"
"Teacher, how wide does the river look to you?" asked Huian. The Bodhisattva stopped her cloud to
investigate. She saw:
Joining up with the deserts to the East,
Reaching the foreign kingdoms in the West,

Wuge in the South
The Tatars in the North.
It was about three hundred miles across,
And three million miles long.
As the waters flowed it was like the earth turning over,
The waves were like rearing mountains.
Broad and boundless,
Vast and mighty:
From three miles' distance the mighty flood is heard.
Immortals' rafts do not reach here,
Lotus leaves cannot float on it.
The sun slants through withered plants and bathes the crooked shore;
Brown clouds block its light and darken the long bank.
How could merchants pass this way?
Has a fisherman ever moored here?
No geese alight on the sandbanks,
But apes cry on the distant shore.
Its color comes from bountiful red smartweed,
While delicate white duckweed drifts together.
As the Bodhisattva was surveying the scene she heard a splash and saw a hideous ogre leap out of the waves.
He was
Not really blue,
Not really black,
With an evil face;

Neither tall,
Nor short,
Bare legs and a muscular body.
His eyes flashed
Like a pair of tortoise−shell lanterns;
The comers of his mouth were as sinister
As a butcher's cauldron.
Protruding fangs like swords,
Red hair, matted and unkempt.
He roared like a clap of thunder,
And ran across the waves with the speed of wind.
This ogre climbed up the bank with a pole in his hands to catch the Bodhisattva, but was stopped by Huian's
staff.
"Don't run away," Huian shouted as the ogre advanced towards him. The battle that ensued between them was
quite terrifying:
Moksa with his iron club,
Using his divine powers to protect the Bodhisattva;
The ogre with his demon−quelling pole
Displaying his valour for all be was worth.
A pair of silver dragons dancing by the river;
Two holy monks in battle on the bank.
The one used his skill to control the River of Flowing Sands
The other had distinguished himself in protecting Guanyin.
The one could make the waves leap and roll,
The other could breathe out fogs and gales.

When the waves leapt and rolled, Heaven and Earth were darkened;
In the fogs and gales, sun and moon were dimmed.
The demon−quelling pole
Was like a white tiger coming down from the mountain;
The iron club
Was like a crouching yellow dragon.
When one goes into action
It beats the undergrowth to start the snakes;
When the other lashes out,
It parts the pines to flush the sparrowhawks.
They fight till the sky goes dark
And the stars twinkle.
Then the mist rises,
And earth and sky are dim.
The one has long been unrivalled in the Weak Waters;
The other has always been the hero of Vulture Peak.
When the pair of them had fought several dozen rounds inconclusively the ogre blocked his opponent's iron
staff and asked, "Where are you from, monk, that you dare to take me on?"
"I am Prince Moksa, the second son of the Pagoda−bearing Heavenly King Li," the other replied. "I am also
Huian the Novice. I am now protecting my teacher on her journey to the East to find the man who will fetch
the scriptures. Which monster are you? How dare you stand in our way?" The ogre then realized who he was.
"I remember," he said, "you used to cultivate your conduct with Guanyin of the Southern Sea in the Purple
Bamboo Grove. Why have you come here?"
"Can't you see my teacher standing there on the bank?"
When the ogre heard this he chanted "na−a−aw" several times to show his respect, withdrew his pole and let
Moksa seize it. Then he bowed to Guanyin and said, "Forgive me, Bodhisattva, and listen to what I have to
tell you. I am not a demon, but the Curtain Raising General who used to stand in attendance by the imperial
chariot in the Hall of Miraculous Mist. Just because I accidentally smashed a crystal dish at a Peach Banquet
the Jade Emperor had me given eight hundred strokes of the rod, exiled me to the lower world, and made me

look like this. And on top of it all every seven days he sends a flying sword here to stab my chest over a
hundred times before it goes back again. It's agony. I get so unbearably cold and hungry that I have to emerge
from the waves every two or three days to devour a traveler. I never thought that in my ignorance I would
insult the merciful Bodhisattva today."
"You were exiled here for a crime against Heaven, but now you are deepening your guilt by harming living
beings. I am now going to the East on the Buddha's orders to find the man who will fetch the scriptures. Why
don't you become one of us and ensure yourself good retribution in future by accompanying the pilgrim as a
disciple and ascending to the Western Heaven to pay homage to the Buddha and seek the scriptures? I will see
to it that the flying sword stops coming to pierce you, and when you are successful you will be forgiven your
crimes and your old job will be given back to you. What do you think of that?"
"I am willing to return to the truth," the ogre replied, then went closer as he continued, "Bodhisattva, I have
lost count of the number of people I have eaten here, and I have even devoured some pilgrims who were
trying to fetch scriptures. I throw the heads of all my victims into the river, and they all sink to the bottom as
not even goose−down will float on this water. But the skeletons of those nine pilgrims floated and would not
sink. I was so impressed by this that I threaded them together with rope and play with them in my spare time.
But I am afraid that the man who is to fetch the scriptures may not get this far, which would wreck my
future."
"Of course he'll get here," the Bodhisattva replied. "You should hang those skeletons from your head and wait
for him. They will come in useful."
"In that case," the ogre said, "I shall await your instructions." The Bodhisattva then laid her hands on his head
and administered the monastic rules to him, chose for him the surname Sha ("Sand") and gave him the
Buddhist name of Wujing ("Awakened to Purity"). Then he entered monkish life and took the Bodhisattva
across the river. He washed his heart, cleansed his thoughts, and stopped killing living creatures. All he did
now was to wait for the pilgrim who would come to fetch the scriptures.
After leaving him the Bodhisattva and Huian hurried on towards the East. When they had been travelling for a
long time they saw a high mountain veiled with an evil mist, and they were unable to climb it on foot. Just
when they were intending to cross the mountain by cloud, a gale wind blew up and a monster suddenly
appeared. He too was very menacing to behold:
His entrails hung from his mouth, rolled up and knotted;
His ears were like rush fans, his eyes shone gold.
His teeth were sharp as steel files,
And when he opened his mouth it was like a brazier.
His golden helmet was tied firmly round his cheeks;
His armour, bound with a silken sash, was a python's sloughed−off skin.
In his hands he held a nailed rake like a dragon's claw,
At his waist hung a curved bow the shape of a half−moon.

His martial might overawed the Year Planet;
His overweening spirit threatened the heavenly gods.
He rushed upon them, and without a second thought smote at the Bodhisattva with his rake. Moksa the Novice
parried his blow, and shouted at the top of his voice, "Remember your manners, damned monster, and watch
out for my staff."
"Monk," the other replied, "you don't know how to keep yourself in one piece. Mind my rake!" At the foot of
the mountain the pair of them rushed upon each other as they struggled for supremacy. It was a fine battle:
The fierce and murderous ogre;
Huian, imposing and able.
The iron staff could pulverize the heart;
The rake struck at the face.
The dust thrown up darkened Heaven and Earth;
The flying sand and stones startled gods and ghouls.
The nine−toothed rake
Gleamed and flashed
As its pair of rings resounded;
The lone staff
Was ominously black
As it whirled in its owner's hands.
One was the heir of a Heavenly King,
One defended the Law on Potaraka Island.
The other was an evil fiend in a mountain cave.
In their battle for mastery,
None knew who the winner would be.

Just when the fight was getting really good, Guanyin threw down a lotus flower from mid−air to separate the
two weapons. The monster, shocked at the sight of it, asked, "Where are you from, monk? How dare you try
to fool me with a 'flower in front of the eyes?'"
"I'll get you, you stinking, flesh−eyed mortal," replied Moksa. "I am a disciple of the Bodhisattva of the
Southern Sea, and this lotus was thrown down by her. Don't you know that?"
"By the Bodhisattva of the Southern Sea do you mean Guanyin Who Eliminates the Three Calamities and
Saves from the Eight Disasters?" the monster asked.
"Who else could I mean?" retorted Moksa. The monster threw down his rake, bowed to him, and asked,
"Where is the Bodhisattva, elder brother? May I trouble you to introduce me?" Moksa looked up and pointed.
"There she is," he said. The monster kowtowed to her and shouted in a shrill voice, "Forgive me, Bodhisattva,
forgive me." Guanyin brought her cloud down to earth, went over to him and asked, "Are you a wild boar
become a devil or a pig turned monster? How dare you block my way?"
"I'm neither a wild boar nor a pig," the monster replied. "I used to be Marshal Tian Peng in the Milky Way.
Because I took some wine to seduce the moon maiden, the Jade Emperor sentenced me to two thousand
hammer blows and exile in the mortal world. My spirit had to find a womb to occupy, but I lost my way and
entered the womb of a sow. That's why I look like this. I ate up my sow mother, drove all the other pigs away,
and seized this mountain, where I keep myself by eating people. I never meant to offend you, Bodhisattva.
Save me, save me, I beg you."
"What is this mountain called?" the Bodhisattva asked.
"It's called the Mount of Blessing, and the cave in it is called the Cloud Pathway Cave. Second Sister Luan,
who used to live there, saw that I knew how to fight and asked me to be the head of her household as her
husband, but she died within a year and all her property became mine. As the days lengthened into years I
found that I had no way of supporting myself, so I had to eat people to keep myself going as I had done
before. Forgive me my sins, I beg of you, Bodhisattva."
"There is an old saying," the Bodhisattva replied, "that goes, 'If you want to have a future, don't do anything
with no future in it?' You broke the law in the upper world, and since then your vicious nature has not been
reformed. You have further sinned by taking life, so this surely means that you will be doubly punished."
"Future!" said the monster angrily. "According to you I should have lived on air! As the saying goes, 'By the
government's law you're beaten to death, and by the Buddha's law you starve to death.' Clear off! Clear off! If
you don't I'll capture this pilgrim and eat this plump and tender old woman. I don't give a hoot if it's double
sinning, triple sinning, or sinning a thousand or ten thousand times over."
"'If a man wishes to be good, Heaven will certainly allow him to be,'" said the Bodhisattva. "If you are
prepared to submit to the truth, there are of course, ways to feed yourself. There are the five kinds of
food−grains, and they are sufficient to assuage hunger, so why eat people to keep alive?"
When the monster heard these words it was as if he awoke from a dream, and he said to the Bodhisattva, "I
would love to reform, but isn't it true that 'a sinner against Heaven has nowhere to pray to?'"
"I'm going to the East on the orders of the Buddha to find the man who will fetch the scriptures," she replied.
"You can be a disciple of his and make this journey to the Western Heaven; thus you will gain merit and atone
for your crimes, and I will see to it that you are freed from disaster."

"I'll go with him, I'll go with him," the monster said over and over again. The Bodhisattva then laid her hands
on his head and he accepted the monastic rules. She gave him the surname Zhu ("Pig") because of his
appearance, and gave him the Buddhist name Zhu Wuneng ("Pig Awakened to Power"). She ordered him to
adhere to the truth and eat only vegetarian food, cutting out the five pungent vegetables as well as the three
forbidden things; wild goose, dog and fish. He was now to wait single−mindedly for the pilgrim who would
come to fetch the scriptures.
The Bodhisattva and Moksa then took their leave of the Pig Awakened to Power and continued on their way
by low−altitude cloud. As they were travelling along they heard a jade dragon call to them in mid−air.
"Which dragon are you?" the Bodhisattva asked as she went up to him. "And why are you undergoing
punishment here?"
"I am the son of Ao Run, the Dragon King of the Western Sea. Because I burnt up the bright pearls in the
palace, my father reported me to the court of Heaven as a rebel. The Jade Emperor had me hung up in mid−air
and given three hundred strokes, and I am to be executed any day now. I beg you to save me, Bodhisattva."
When she heard his plea the Bodhisattva went in through the Southern Gates of Heaven with Moksa. Here
they were met by the Heavenly Teachers Qiu and Zhang, who asked them, "Where are you going?"
"I would like an audience with the Jade Emperor." The two Heavenly Teachers hurried in to announce her,
and the Jade Emperor came out of his palace to receive her. The Bodhisattva went forward to greet him and
said, "On my way to the East on the orders of the Buddha to find the man to fetch the scriptures, I met a
wicked dragon suspended in mid−air.. I have come here especially to ask you to spare his life and give him to
me so that I can teach him to serve the pilgrim with his legs." On hearing this the Jade Emperor issued a
decree pardoning him, and he sent a heavenly general to release him and give him to the Bodhisattva. The
Bodhisattva thanked him for his generosity and left. The young dragon kowtowed to show how grateful he
was for having his life spared, and he obediently did what the Bodhisattva told him to. She took him to a deep
ravine, where he was to wait until the pilgrim came. When that happened he was to turn into a white horse and
achieve merit by going to the Western Heaven. On receiving his orders the young dragon hid himself.
The Bodhisattva led Moksa the Novice across this mountain, and they hurried on towards the East. Before
they had gone much further they suddenly saw ten thousand beams of golden light and a thousand wisps of
propitious vapour.
"Teacher," said Moksa, "the place where all the light is coming from is the Five Elements Mountain, where
the Tathagata's restriction order is posted."
"This must be cause that Great Sage Equaling Heaven who wrecked the Peach Banquet and threw the
Heavenly Palace into chaos is imprisoned there."
"That's right," Moksa replied, and teacher and pupil climbed the mountain together to look at the paper. On it
were written the true words Om mani padme bum, and when the Bodhisattva saw them she sighed deeply and
composed a poem that went:
"Pity the evil monkey who did not obey the lord
In his arrogance he showed off his valour in the old days,

In his folly he wrecked the Peach Banquet,
And he had the effrontery to sin in the Tushita Palace.
In the army of a hundred thousand there was none to match him;
His might was felt above the ninefold heavens.
But now he has been caught by our Tathagata, the Buddha:
Will he ever be able to unleash his talents and win more glory?"
The conversation between teacher and disciple had disturbed the Great Sage, who shouted from under the
roots of the mountain, "Who's that up there?" When she heard this the Bodhisattva hurried down the mountain
to visit him. At the foot of the mountainside the local gods, the mountain gods and the heavenly generals who
were guarding the Great Sage all bowed to the Bodhisattva in greeting and took her to the Great Sage. She
saw that he was pressed down inside a stone box, so that he could speak but could not move his body.
"Monkey," the Bodhisattva said, "do you know who I am?" The Great Sage opened wide his fiery eyes with
their golden pupils, nodded his head and shouted at the top of his voice, "Of course I recognize you. You,
thank goodness, are the All−Compassionate. All−Merciful Deliverer from Suffering, the Bodhisattva Guanyin
from Potaraka Island in the Southern Sea. You're a very welcome visitor. Every day here seems like a year,
and nobody I know has ever come to see me. Where have you come from?"
"I have received a mandate from the Buddha to go to the East and find the man who will fetch the scriptures,"
she replied, "and as I was passing this way I decided to come over and see you."
"The Buddha fooled me and crushed me under this mountain−−I haven't been able to stretch myself for five
hundred years. I desperately hope that you will be obliging enough to rescue me, Bodhisattva."
"You wretch," she replied, "you have such an appalling criminal record that I'm afraid you'd only make more
trouble if I got you out."
"I have already repented," he said, "and hope that you will show me the road I should follow. I want to
cultivate my conduct." Indeed:
When an idea is born in a man's mind
It is known throughout Heaven and Earth.
If good and evil are not rewarded and punished
The world is bound to go to the bad.

The Bodhisattva was delighted to hear what he had to say.
"The sacred scriptures say," she replied, '"If one's words are good, they will meet with a response from even a
thousand miles away; if they are bad, they will be opposed from the same distance.' If this is your state of
mind, then wait while I go to the East to find the man who will fetch the scriptures; I'll tell him to rescue you.
You can be his disciple, observe and uphold the faith, enter our Buddha's religion, and cultivate good
retribution for yourself in the future. What do you say to that?"
"I'll go, I'll go," the Great Sage repeated over and over again.
"As you have reformed," she said, "I'll give you a Buddhist name."
"I've already got a name. It's Sun Wukong." The Bodhisattva, very pleased, said, "I made two converts earlier,
and their names both contained Wu ('Awakened'). There's no need to give you any further instructions, so I'll
be off." The Great Sage, now aware of his own Buddha−nature, was converted to the Buddha's religion; and
the Bodhisattva devotedly continued her search for a saintly monk.
After leaving that place she and Huian carried straight on to the East, and before long they reached Chang'an,
the capital of the Great Tang. Putting away their mists and clouds, teacher and pupil turned themselves into a
pair of scabby itinerant monks and went inside the city of Chang'an. It was already dark, and beside the great
market street they saw a shrine to a local tutelary god and went in. The local god was thrown into confusion at
the sight of them, and the devil soldiers quaked with terror; they knew that she was a Bodhisattva, and
kowtowed to her in greeting. The local god then scurried off to tell the City God, the Lord of the Alter, and
the gods of all the other shrines in Chang'an. When they knew that the Bodhisattva had come they all went to
report to her and said, "Bodhisattva, please forgive us for our crime in being late to welcome you."
"You mustn't let a whisper of this get out," she said. "I have come here on a decree from the Buddha to find
someone to fetch the scriptures. I shall be borrowing your temple for a few days while I find this true monk,
and then I shall go back." All the gods returned to their own shrines, and they took the local god to stay in the
temple of the City God. Teacher and disciple disguised their true appearances. If you don't know whom they
found to fetch the scriptures, listen to the explanation in the next installment.

